When it comes to authentication, there are many ways to authenticate.
In Spring,
each method of authentication has its own authentication filter that
knows how to intercept and pass that specific authentication request
and create an authentication token.
At this point, it will then hand the token over to the AuthenticationManager,
who, as the name suggests, manages the actual authentication.
Hence, to configure our test user,
we need to customize the AuthenticationManager.
Again,
we extend the Configure class that gives us access to the
AuthenticationManager builder object.
By default,
Spring Boot configured an in‑memory authentication and created a
default user and printed the password in the logs.
Now that's annoying as you have to copy and paste the password
each time we are restarting our application. And now we also
want a user with an admin role.
So let's create our own in‑memory implementation with a test user,
Victoria. We'll give her a password and also the admin role.
Now we need to append the noop before the password.
Now the reason for this is that Spring Security expects each password to be
encoded and, by default, uses a delegating password encoder. Now there are
many different algorithms for passwords like Bcrypt, Scrypt, MD5, etc. So
depending on the prefix before the password,
the decoder will use the appropriate algorithm.
Now this has a number of benefits as overtime
algorithms for passwords fall out of favor,
such as MD5, which is now no longer recommended.
And so most likely you will need to upgrade users' credentials to
more secure algorithms in the future. However,
there is no way to simply upgrade an MD5 hash to a Bcrypt hash.
You'll need to ask the user to change their password and encode
their new password with the new algorithm.
But that takes time to migrate all users, and they
won't all do it at the same time.
So delegating through the password encoder allows your application
to support different encodings at the same time.
Hence, the need for the prefix. Now noop is actually no encoding.
It's basically plaintext and should only be used for testing.
You can see Spring Security has it deprecated to warn against this. A
better way is to actually inject the password encoder and encode our
password. Now by default, it will be set to Bcrypt.
Okay, now if we restart our application, we can see our new test user.
Now I'd like to reiterate that in memory is not designed for production.
And you can see the AuthenticationManager allows you to
configure JDBC or LDAP or even your own. For now, at the early stages of the development, this works real well.